There's that music again. Welcome back to Shiloh Creek, little ones — and if it's your first time at the water, settle in beside me.
Let me ask you something. Did you ever break something — and before anybody saw, wish you could un-break it, and hide it, and have nobody ever know?
Well. I'm going to tell you about the day a young friend of mine broke something I loved dearly. And the day didn't go the way he was afraid it would — it went better, and so did he. God was watching the whole while, the way God always is, and kind about it.
It was a bright morning under the willow, when along came Bongo the bear cub — all big paws and bigger heart. Now, Bongo helping is a wonderful thing. It is also, every single time, an adventure.
Old Timber! Let me help! You sit, I'll do the lifting — I got this. Big strong helper bear, that's me. Point me at it. I am READY.
Ooh — helping? I LOVE helping. Wait — wait — I'll sort everything by SIZE, no, by COLOR, no — by how much I LIKE it.
Here, I'll just zip your whole shelf around really fast and you tell me when it looks — there. ...Is that better? ...That's worse, isn't it.
I'll help too! New favorite thing — TIDYING. Who knew? I'll defend this cozy willow spot with my LIFE, and also a broom. Do you have a broom?
STAND ASIDE, small bear — a job of THIS magnitude calls for EXPERIENCE. I shall DIRECT. You there — lift! You there — sort! And someone fetch me a grape, directing is thirsty work.
Now, on a little ledge above the water sat the one thing I treasured most — a smooth grey river-stone I'd carried since I was young.
Ooh — this smooth grey stone's all dusty. I'll clean THAT too. Don't worry, gentlest bear in the whole creek — I'll just reach right up and dust it off.
Careful — careful — dust — oop. Oop. OOP. ...No — wait — come back — I GOT — ...I don't got it. ...I don't got it!
And it broke clean in two. The whole morning seemed to hold its breath.
...Oh no. Oh no no. ...Look left, look right. ...Nobody saw. Quick — under Fern's leaf, the big green one. ...There. ...You can't even tell. ...Nothing happened.
...It's fine. It's totally fine. I'll fix it later. I'll find some glue, or some sap — trees have sap — I'll fix it before he ever notices. ...This is FINE.
Now, that bear cannot tell a lie to save his life. His ears go pink, his paws get busy, and the harder he tries to act normal, the LESS normal he looks. So when I asked where my little stone had got to — well.
The stone? WHAT stone. Oh — THAT stone. It's being cleaned. At the cleaning place. The stone cleaning place. Way over there. Very far.
They came and GOT it. Professionals. With a little cart. ...Why are my ears hot? Are my ears hot? They feel hot.
GONE? The treasured stone is GONE? Oh, woe! Oh, calamity most foul! I shall compose a LAMENT. Friends, gather — we mourn a stone of great — wait.
Where DID it go? This is a MYSTERY. I LOVE a mystery. STAND BACK — I shall investigate.
No investigating! No mystery, nothing to investigate. ...You don't need to look under any leaves. ...Especially not THAT leaf. ...The big green one. ...Why are you all looking at the leaf.
Wait, the special stone's missing? The one he's had FOREVER? Bongo — are you okay? You look like you swallowed a bee. Should I get help? I'll get a LOT of help.
I'm GREAT. So great. Bee? No bee. No bees here. Hey, look over there — is that a cloud? A really interesting cloud?
Let's go look at the cloud. ...I'll be by the rocks. Not THOSE rocks. Other rocks. Totally different rocks. ...Bye.
Ooh — a MISSING STONE? Wait — wait — I'll build a stone-finder! With a little arm! Bongo, hold still, you've got the GUILTIEST face I've ever scanned and my finder points right at — huh. ...Why's it pointing at you?
A cloud? He fled a STONE MYSTERY to look at a CLOUD? ...That is the single most suspicious thing I have ever witnessed. ...And I have witnessed many clouds.
...This was supposed to be a GOOD day. I was gonna be a good helper, and instead I broke the best thing he has, and now I'm a bear who tells lies about carts. ...I don't even like carts.
...You can stop running now, Bongo. ...I've been watching since this morning. ...And I saw you look at that fern leaf about forty times.
...I won't ask what you're carrying. ...I can see it's heavy. ...I'll just tell you one thing my old shell taught me. ...Heavy things get lighter the very second you set them down. ...I'll be right here.
...I don't know what you mean. ...I'm not carrying anything. ...It's just a normal, regular, nothing-happened day. ...How did you know it was heavy?
Old Timber, tell us the story of your special stone! The one you've had forever. Go get it, go get it — I wanna SEE it!
And nothing makes an old elephant happier. So I started for the ledge to fetch it down — not knowing it was bare.
NO — wait! Don't go over there! The ledge is — slippery! Very slippery, famous for it. And also there's a bird's nest! New baby birds! We mustn't disturb them, it's the LAW.
Let's hear a DIFFERENT story! I'll tell one. Once there was a bear who did NOTHING wrong, and everything was FINE, and nobody ever needs to check the ledge, the end.
Baby birds? On MY watch? I am a PROFESSIONAL bird and I would KNOW. Bongo, you are behaving most peculiarly, and I declare this entire morning a SUSPICIOUS one.
Bongo's sweating SO much. Is that normal? New favorite thing — NO, wait, this is a bad thing, abort, this is a bad thing.
A bear who did NOTHING wrong? In all my years of DRAMA, the bear who announces he did nothing wrong has ALWAYS done the thing. ...It's practically a law of the THEATRE.
And right about then — there's a line in the Bible about exactly this. About the hiding, and the telling, and which one is heavier to carry. But before I reached that ledge... a small voice stopped me cold.
...Bongo. ...There's no baby birds, and you know it. ...There's two halves of a stone under that fern leaf. ...And it's not getting any lighter. ...Set it down.
And the whole creek went quiet. Bongo's busy paws went still. And the bear who'd been talking so fast all morning... stopped. He looked up at me, and every word came out plain and true.
...I broke it. ...It was me. ...I knocked your stone, and it cracked, right in two. ...And I got so scared that I hid the pieces under the fern leaf.
...And then I lied about it. All morning. ...There was no cleaning place. ...It was just me, and I broke the thing you love. ...I'm so sorry, Old Timber.
...I wanted to fix it before you knew. ...But it got so heavy. ...I couldn't carry it one more minute. ...So I'm telling you the true thing, even though I'm scared.
...Oh, Bongo.
...There. ...You set it down. ...See how you can breathe again?
Come here, little bear. Look at me. The stone was only a thing. A dear thing — but a thing. You are not a thing. You're my friend. And the truth you just told me, scared as you were, is worth more than that stone ever was. You set the heavy thing down — the bravest lifting you did all day.
...You're not even a little bit mad? ...I broke the thing you've had forever. ...I really thought you'd be... I don't know. ...Done with me.
Done with you? Never. And here's a thing nobody told me when I was young. That's the way God meets us — when we stop the hiding and just tell the truth. Not with a frown. With open arms. The hiding was the only heavy part.
You're not breakable like a stone, Bongo. Now — fetch both pieces from under Fern's leaf. We're not throwing them away, and we're not hiding them. You and I are going to MEND it. Together.
...Okay. ...There's tree sap in the old log, the sticky kind — I'll get it. ...I press here, against the crack? ...Like this? ...And hold?
Just like that. ...And... there. Two pieces, made one again. See the line down the middle? We're not hiding that. Every mark on this old stone is a day I remember — this chip, a river I crossed; this dark spot, a friend I miss.
...So the marks aren't the broken parts. ...They're the remembering parts.
That's it exactly. And this line, right down the middle? ...This is the day a young bear was brave enough to tell me the truth. My favorite mark on the whole stone now.
...Okay I'm not crying, YOU'RE crying. New favorite thing — THAT, right there. Bongo, get over here, that's a group-hug situation and I don't make the rules.
I KNEW it was Bongo. I solved the mystery. ...Well. ...I solved it AFTER he said it out loud. ...But I was CLOSE. And I shall compose no lament — for the stone is mended, and so, I think, is the bear.
And with the mended stone warm in my trunk, I asked the little bear one quiet thing. ...Bongo. What did you find out today, about the hiding... and the telling?
...That the hiding was the heavy part. ...Not the breaking — that was an accident. ...But the hiding, I picked up myself, and carried ALL day, and it got heavier every hour. ...And the second I told the truth... it just wasn't heavy anymore.
...That's the realest thing I've ever heard a bear say. ...And I have heard Bongo say a LOT of things.
Wait — wait — I figured out the WHOLE thing, and it's not even a contraption. ...When you mess up, the scared part says HIDE it. But hiding only makes it heavier. ...Telling the truth makes it light again. ...And the friend you tell, if they really love you? ...They don't get mad. ...They help you mend it.
...Said the fastest one. ...About the slowest, heaviest thing there is. ...Set it down. ...Every time.
Mm. Named best by the quickest voice at the creek — and the slowest. You found it your own selves.
Now — that line I promised you. It comes from the Bible, from the book of Proverbs — the wise sayings King Solomon wrote down. Chapter twenty-eight, verse thirteen. It goes like this.
He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.
...Whoa. ...That's my whole day. ...The covering-up was the heavy part. ...And the confessing was where the mercy was waiting. ...Somebody wrote down exactly what happened to me, a long time ago.
That it did, little bear. To COVER a wrong keeps the day heavy, the way it kept yours. But to CONFESS it, and turn from it? That's where the mercy is. Mercy was waiting the whole time — it only needed the truth to come find it. God made it that way on purpose.
...Set it down. ...And the mercy was already there. ...I'm gonna remember that one. ...And I bet Fern would've helped me mend it too, wherever her adventure's taken her.
And now — Professor Hoot's Totally True Facts. The most certain owl at the creek shares a fact.
Good evening. A fact, children, entirely true — and perfect for a day of mending. When a tree is wounded — a branch torn away, a gash in the bark — it does NOT hide the broken place. Instead, it grows brand-new wood right over and around the hurt, and seals it safely in.
Scholars call it compartmentalizing — a grand word that simply means the tree walls the hurt place off in its own little room and keeps right on growing. And the mark stays, sealed in the wood. The tree did not pretend the break away — it made the break part of its story.
And many a knot in an old plank marks a branch the tree once grew its trunk around — the very same patient trick. A fact, established beyond dispute. Good evening.
Mm. A fine fact, Professor — and a true one. The tree keeps its mark, and the stone keeps its seam. You hold the wonder; the meaning, I'll keep by the water.
And before we go — three frogs, one enormous question. The Mudpuppy Minutes.
Today on Mudpuppy Minutes — now that Bongo's gone and BROKEN something — we will explain... how a broken thing gets fixed. What's the SECRET of mending?
EASY. You don't fix it. You WAIT. A broken rock grows right back on its own — by Tuesday. Everybody knows rocks regrow. That's why there are so many of them. Boom. Science.
AND ALSO — no, wait. I watched Old Timber. The rock did NOT grow back. He pressed the two bits together with sticky tree stuff and held it till it set. So really, somebody just carefully puts it back together with their hands. ...Huh. ...That actually makes sense.
...Wait. ...Splash. ...You're RIGHT. He used his HANDS. And the sticky stuff. Mending is just... carefully putting it back. That's — that's the real one.
Oh no — too easy! Hands? Everybody HAS hands — well, flippers — that can't be the secret. Take it back. ...Mudpuppies — we have solved it! The secret of mending is, you ASK the rock nicely to un-break. If you're POLITE enough, it does. Manners. That's the energy.
Mm. Now hear me, little ones — no rock grows back by Tuesday, and no rock un-breaks because you asked it nicely. Splash had it right: a broken thing gets mended when someone carefully, patiently puts the pieces back together. That's the honest truth. Those three, though? ...I'd let them keep the polite rock.
Old Timber? ...Thanks for not being done with me. ...And next time I knock something over — and there WILL be a next time — I'm telling you right away. ...Bear promise.
I'll hold you to it, little bear. So this is Old Timber, with a mended stone warm in my trunk and a new favorite mark right down the middle of it. Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends.
And little ones — whatever you're carrying that feels too heavy... set it down. Tell the truth. There's mercy waiting. So go on and travel light.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.